Re-focusing the goal of the system from the accumulation of capital and other factors of production to the abundance of commons as factors of opportunities and regeneration for the thrivability and renewal of the system could serve as a medium for accelerating the adoption of practices that address social, environmental and economic dimensions in a sustainable, cohesive and interconnected manner.



The potential for continuous widespread disruptive innovation and radical change rests in the field of change agents or activists who are actively engaged and are taking things into their hands. The legions of realistic optimists of all types of backgrounds who perceive current dangers and the need for systemic change, even when they don’t really know what needs to be done and how they can get involved. These are the ones who need to be inspired, empowered and enabled. They observe and are aware of where the world is going and they have the capacity to apply changes on the ground everyday.

Change agents driven by their own engagement and action logics, linked to the paradigm out of which they would like the new system to arise, gather around the social objects they are attracted to, the leverage points they seek to act upon for effective results, which determine priorities and the pathways envisioned.
These social objects are the nodes around which emerging social movements converge and common visions and praxis are shaped, forming clusters of cooperating specialized agents. That is where meaning is created and shared through languages that help us understand each other, where conversations and repeated interactions are initiated, and from where new territories are explored.
The action frameworks that are built or shaped from practice to serve movements and communities provide a context for co-individuation: the processes by which identities of individual and collective change agents are formed, transformed, and differentiated in relation to each other and to the forces that hold people together and fuel their capacity to act and react to signals in cohesive and effective ways. Clusters grow and bound- aries expand with the arrival of new agents driven by similar engagement or action logics that create new opportunities for interaction and adaptation, allowing for agents to co-evolve and for a system to innovatelocally, this is what makes diversity so important.At the same time however, as these frameworks create ‘natural boundaries’ around clusters of cooperation or ‘niches of action’ they become ‘exclusive’ of alternative frameworks. This hinders relational dynamics and our capacity to collaborate across groups outside of our domains of action. As all niches have different opin- ions about the challenges the world is facing and the ways to address them, each tries to convince others that they hold the best solutions and method- ologies, trying to ‘funnel’ all the other solutions through their perspective.Our territory of action as a whole is actually com- posed of islands that do not share the logic, the motivators and the narrative.

The legions of change agents already busy interven- ing on a variety of leverage points or ready to be mobilized form an ecology for transformative action, with its multiple niches and clusters, adap- tive and generative processes, patterns of relation- ships, and capacities for co-evolution. They are distributed within the wider system where they have the potential to drive systemic change and human development. The critical point is for these distributed and locally organized efforts to coalesce in order to change the feedbacks and information structures of the system and its capacity for renewal so that the system cantake care of itself in a healthy way.In the changing image of man report published in 1973, a team of researchers from Stanford University established that cultural transforma- tions historically occurred with the presence of a strong image to embody change and crystal- lize imagination and action toward new visions of the world. They suggested that such inform- ing image would need to provide a holistic sense and perspective on life, entail an ecological ethic, entail a self-realization ethic, be multileveled, multifaceted, and integrative, lead to a balancing and coordinating satisfactions along many dimen- sions, be experimental and open-ended. This describes well the characteristics of an ecology from which transformative action and a transfor- mative image can emerge.


 Centers as essence of life
One can refer to idea of "centers" (Alexander 2002) as the 'why/what for' determinant of the attributes of a design and from there relate to the notion of "pattern". Centers are the essence of life. "Patterns" are combined in 'generative sequences' to create/(re)design better "centers." Patterns are not only problem solving principles (Alexander 1977), but they are also systems-structuring and generative elements with their own feedback loops that can be applied at various levels and scales as things are unfolding, enabling to go from liquid to solid, the diversity of which creates a
 
resilient 'structure' that is generated both in a constructed and in an emergent way. The scaffold is  being built as we go, and the existing structure becomes the scaffold for more, enabling to add new 'blocks' like a Lego construction. One can imagine elements with the hooks and bridges that would enable connection and reconnection to other generative elements to form a newer always more resilient and 'true to purpose' whole, with ways to visualize the parts and wholes as things unfold and evolve, to navigate the adjacent possibles from our respective localities, learning and identifying needs and opportunities on the way. A mosaic of possibilities assembled around communities of practice and clusters of engagement.
Centers here would be what people rally around, the social objects described above towards which people direct their attention and care, intention and purpose, and action and practice, driven by their own engagement and action logics. Seeing centers as essence of life, as nodes of embodiment of commons logic, sits quite well with the definition of commons as factors of livelihood and enablement, generative of abundance, to be nurtured or (re)generated or an approach of commons and the common world as the conditions for existence (Garcès 2013).
These centers are constitutive of commons health and protection, designed or 'constructed' not as representation of a desired social order, but as generative systems. And the patterns, assembled for each center/social object according to its own internal drive or engagement logic would be aimed at 'bettering' the commons in whole or in part in all its forms and dimensions. So in practical terms, the patterns we envision are not prescriptive of solutions, they are prescriptive of generative principles, mechanisms, and inquiry processes and they orient retrieval of information and decision making towards specific systemic effects (re)generative of the commons. 